CHAPTER FIVE 

#Zhuangzi 

***Introduction*** 

Little is known of Zhuangzi! beyond what we can gather from the book named after him. Much of the book, however, is unapologetically fic- tional, so the stories it tells about him provide us more insight into his per- sona than into the historical facts of his life. We know from external sources that his friend Huizi served in the court of King Hui of Liang (390–319 B . C . E .), which places Zhuangzi in the end of the fourth century B . C . E . The version of the text we have was assembled around 300 C . E . and is widely agreed to be the work of multiple authors. Though some passages seem to have been written by Zhuangzi, the book must initially have been compiled by his students and then supplemented by later contributors and editors. The following selections are drawn primarily from what scholars generally recognize as the earliest portions of the text, which were either written or inspired by Zhuangzi himself. Zhuangzi has a huge vocabulary, draws freely from history and mythol- ogy, and is equally at home writing poetry, logical analyses, dialogue, and narrative. His references to Kongzi, Laozi, and the Mohists demonstrate that he was familiar with their ideas, though the absence of quotations leaves uncertain whether he had access to the same texts we do. Huizi, who argued against the possibility of distinguishing one thing from another, is known to have debated one of Mengzi’s students. So Zhuangzi must at least have heard about Mengzi’s ideas, though he never mentions him by name. Zhuangzi does not present his ideas systematically or define his central terms. But he regularly speaks of tian $ , “Heaven,” as the highest ideal for all things. He contrasts tian, which could also be translated as “nature,” to ren é , “people,” or “humanity.” The human, for Zhuangzi, includes every- thing from concrete activities that interfere with nature, such as the mutilation of criminals, to abstract ideas, such as shi/fei bc , “right and wrong,” that people project onto the world. Zhuangzi also speaks of dao / , “the Way,” which encompasses both the Way the world is and the way for people to live in it. Though he believes there is a way, he is skeptical of our ability to learn much about it through words or thinking. In fact, he attacks thinking in order to make room, instead, for experience and intu- ition. Sometimes his attacks are direct, with arguments illustrating the lim- itations of language, sometimes indirect, with strange stories having no obvious moral or hero. Rather than delivering a message, the Zhuangzi seems to go out of its way to defy understanding. In this sense, though the stories are often fantastic, the book is meant to offer a realistic lesson in the uselessness of trying to figure out life. Thinking and talking have a place: Zhuangzi does a lot of both of them. The challenge is to harmonize think- ing and talking with the other, incomprehensible aspects life. In the second century B . C . E ., the historian Sima Qian classified Zhuangzi as a founding member of the Daoist school, rather than as a Confucian or a Mohist. This is an oversimplification. There was no “Daoist school” in his time, and, as readers will soon see, he would have resisted any classification of this sort. He knew and thought a lot about the other philosophers presented in this book, particularly Kongzi. But his relation- ships to them were too complex to be summarized as simple agreement or disagreement. The influence of these other thinkers on Zhuangzi and the implications of his arguments for their ideas are complex and difficult ques- tions that readers will have to sort out for themselves, with the help of some of the secondary literature that is listed following the translation. 

##Chapter One: Wandering Round and About 

In the northern darkness there is a fish named Minnow. No one knows how many thousand li around he is. He transforms himself into a bird named Breeze. 1 No one knows how many thousand li across she is. She ruf- fles and flies, and her wings are like clouds hanging from Heaven. As the seas turn, she thinks to migrate to the southern darkness. The southern darkness is Heaven’s pool. 2 1 The exact meaning of the bird’s name is unclear, but it was pronounced similarly to the word for wind. 2 The word translated as “Heaven” also means both sky and Nature.

Zhuangzi ■ 205 The Tales of Qi 3 records wonders. It says, “In her migration to the south- ern darkness, Breeze flaps along the water for three thousand li, spirals up on a whirlwind to ninety thousand li, and goes six months at a stretch.” Horse-shaped clouds, motes of dust, living things blowing breath at each other—is the blue-green of Heaven its proper color or just its being so endlessly far away? It looks just the same to her gazing down from above. If water isn’t deep it can’t support big boats. Spill a cup of water on the floor and crumbs will be its boats. But put the cup there and it will stick— because the water is too shallow and the boat too big. If wind isn’t deep it can’t support big wings. This is why Breeze rises ninety thousand li with the wind there beneath her. Only then can she rest on the wind, carrying blue Heaven on her back, and nothing can stop her. Only then does she set her sights to the south. The cicada and the student-dove laugh at her, saying, “When we start up and fly, we struggle for the elm or the sandalwood. Sometimes we don’t even make it but just plunk to the ground. What is she doing rising ninety thousand li and heading south?” People going to the green meadows can bring three meals and return with their bellies still full. People going a hun- dred li need to grind grain for an overnight. People going a thousand li need to gather grain for three months. What do these two little bugs know? Little knowledge does not measure up to big knowledge, or few years to many. How do I know this is so? The morning mushroom does not know the waxing and waning of the moon, and the Hui-cricket does not know spring and fall. This is because they are short lived. South of Chu there is a turtle called Dark Genius, which counts five hundred years as a single spring and five hundred years as a single fall. In high antiquity there was a tree called Big Spring, which counted eight thousand years as a single spring and eight thousand years as a single fall. Nowadays, only eight-hun- dred-year-old Peng Zu is famous, and everyone compares themselves to him. Isn’t it sad? This was the subject of King Tang’s questions to his teacher, Cramped. 4 3 We have no knowledge of this text and, judging from its name, it appears to be ficti- tious. Here and elsewhere, Zhuangzi may be parodying appeals to textual authority by ap- pealing to fanciful “classics.” 4 Tang’s teacher is named “Ji è ,” which commentators explain means narrow—as op- posed to “Tang u ,” which means broad. Chapter Five of the book Liezi is entitled “The Questions of Tang” and contains an expanded version of what might have been their con- versation. For a translation, see A. C. Graham, The Book of Lieh Tzu, reprint (London: John Murray, 1973), pp. 92–117. For more on King Tang, see Important Figures.

206 ■ zhuangzi In the bald north there is a dark sea, Heaven’s pool. There is a fish there whose breadth is several tens of thousands of li . No one knows his length. His name is Minnow. There is a bird there, whose name is Breeze. Her back is as huge as Mount Tai, and her wings are like clouds hanging from Heaven. Circling on the whirlwind, she spirals upward ninety thousand li, bursts through the clouds and mist, carrying the blue sky. Afterward she heads south, traveling to the southern darkness. The accusing quail laughs at her, saying, “Where is she going? I rear up and don’t go more than a few yards before coming down, soaring and roaming amid brambles and briars—this indeed is the perfection of flying! Where is she going?” This is the debate between little and big. People who know how to do one job, handle a small town, or impress a ruler to get put in charge of a state see themselves like this. Songzi would still laugh at them. The whole world could praise him and he would not be encouraged. The whole world could condemn him and he would not be upset. He has fixed the difference between inner and outer and distin- guished the limits of glory and disgrace. Yet he stops there. He is uncon- ventional, but there is still something left unplanted. Liezi 5 rides about on the wind. It’s wonderful! He’s gone two weeks at a time. His attitude toward wealth is unconventional. But, though he man- ages to avoid walking, he still relies on something. If he could chariot the norms of Heaven and earth and ride the changes in the six mists 6 to wan- der the inexhaustible, then what would there be to rely on? Hence it is said that perfect people have no self, spiritual people have no accomplishment, and sagely people have no name. The sage-king Yao offered his empire to the hermit Whence. “To keep the torches burning when the sun and moon are shining is troubling too much for light. Irrigating the fields when the spring rains are falling is working too hard for water. You are here, my teacher, and the empire is in order. With me still presiding over it, I feel defective. Please take it.” 5 Little is known of Liezi. The book that bears his name contains scant biographical in- formation. He may have been a practitioner of magic, or an ascetic who achieved freedom by withdrawing from the world. Either way, Zhuangzi’s highly metaphoric criticism of him here suggests that he would have been better off accepting the world as it is. 6 “Mists,” here and below, is qi j . See Important Terms .

Zhuangzi ■ 207 Whence said, “With you ordering it, the empire is well ordered. If I were to go ahead and replace you, would it be for the name? But name is only the guest of reality. Do I want to be the guest? The tailor bird nesting in the deep forest takes no more than a branch. The mole drinking at the river takes no more than a bellyful. Give it up, my lord. I have no use for the empire. Though the cook at the sacrifice fails to order the kitchen, the pre- siding priest does not leap over the goblets and platters to replace him.” Shoulder Dig said to Step Brother, 7 “I heard what Jie Yu said. 8 It was big but didn’t stand for anything. It went on and on without coming back. I was frightened by what he said. It was as endless as the Milky Way, full of inconsistencies, and didn’t approach the human situation.” Step Brother asked, “What did he say?” “He said there are spiritual people living in the distant Maiden Moun- tains. Their skin is like frost, and they are gentle and restrained as virgins. They don’t eat the five grains but sip wind and drink dew. They chariot the cloudy mists, ride the flying dragons, and wander beyond the four seas. By concentrating their spirit, they keep things from harm and ripen the har- vests. I thought he was crazy and didn’t believe him.” Step Brother said, “Yes. The blind can’t appreciate beautiful patterns or the deaf bells and drums. But are blindness and deafness confined to the physi- cal form? Your knowledge has them, too. His talk is like a fertile woman. 9 Those people he describes, with that Virtue of theirs, will align with the ten thousand things and make them one. The world longs for chaos, but why should they fret and make the world their business? Nothing can harm these people. Though a great flood should knock against Heaven, they would not drown. Though a heat wave should melt stone and scorch the earth, they would not burn. From their dust and chaff you could mold the sages Yao and Shun. Why would they want to make things their business? A man of Song 10 invested in ceremonial caps and took them to Yue. But the Yue people cut their hair and tattoo their bodies and had no use for them. Yao brought order 7 This character’s name, Lian Shu, may also suggest a connection to the Shu clan, one of the Three Families that ruled Kongzi’s native state of Lu for most of his lifetime. 8 In Analects 18.5 (not in this volume), Jie Yu, known as The Madman of Chu, criticizes Kongzi for wasting his efforts on a lost cause. When Kongzi tries to speak with him, he runs away. 9 Jie Yu’s words are “like a fertile woman” in the sense that they await the right kind of person in order to bear fruit. 10 The people of Song were the butt of many jokes. Cf. Mengzi 2A2 and Hanfeizi , chap- ter 49, p. 324.

208 ■ zhuangzi to the people of the empire and stabilized the government within the seas. But when he went to see the four masters of the distant Maiden Mountains, north of the Fen River, he lost the world in a daze.” 11 Huizi said to Zhuangzi, “The king of Wei 12 left me the seeds of a big gourd. I planted them, and when they grew, the fruit was a yard across. I filled them with water but they weren’t sturdy enough to hold it. I split them into ladles but they were too big to dip into anything. It wasn’t that they weren’t wonderfully big, but they were useless. So I smashed them.” 13 Zhuangzi said, “You, sir, are certainly clumsy about using big things. There were some people in Song who were good at making ointment to pre- vent chapped hands. Year after year, they used it in their business bleaching silk. A traveler heard about it and asked to buy the formula for a hundred pieces of gold. The clan assembled and consulted, saying, ‘For years we’ve bleached silk and never made more than a few pieces of gold. Today in a sin- gle morning we can sell the trick for a hundred pieces. Let’s give it to him!’ “The traveler got it and recommended it to the king of Wu, who was having trouble with the state of Yue. The king of Wu put him in command, and that winter he met the men of Yue in a naval battle. Using the oint- ment to keep his soldiers’ hands from chapping, he defeated Yue badly and was rewarded with a portion of the conquered territory. The ability to pre- vent chapped hands was the same in either case. But one gained territory while the others never escaped bleaching silk because what they used it for was different. 14 Now you had these gigantic gourds. Why not lash them to- 11 Earlier in Chinese history, the Fen River had been the northwestern border separating the Chinese from the non-Chinese world (i.e., the “barbarians”). By Zhuangzi’s time, how- ever, military expansion and cultural assimilation had moved the boundary back, so the Fen was closer to the center. 12 Wei is another name for the state of Liang. Hence this is King Hui of Liang, the same ruler who employed Huizi in his administration. 13 It is clear from the beginning of the next anecdote that Huizi’s story here is meant as a criticism of Zhuangzi. 14 Wu and Yue were two non-Chinese states to the south that were gradually incorpo- rated into the Chinese world during the Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods. When hostilities broke out between them in 510 B . C . E ., Wu dominated initially, which was presumably when Zhuangzi’s story was meant to take place. Yue rallied its forces, however, and destroyed Wu in 473, which probably meant execution for the traveler or his descen- dants. The history of Wu, which would have been familiar to Zhuangzi’s contemporary readers, makes the moral of the parable uncertain.

Zhuangzi ■ 209 gether like big buoys and go floating on the rivers and lakes instead of wor- rying that they were too big to dip into anything? Your mind is full of un- derbrush, my friend.” 15 Huizi said to Zhuangzi, “I have a big tree, the kind people call Spring. Its trunk is so gnarled it won’t take a chalk line, and its branches are so twisted they won’t fit a compass or square. It stands by the road but no builder looks twice at it. Your talk is similarly big and useless, and everyone alike rejects it.” Zhuangzi said, “Haven’t you seen a weasel? It bends down then rises up. It springs east and west, not worrying about heights or depths—and lands in a snare or dies in a net. Now the yak is so big he looks like clouds hang- ing from Heaven. He sure can be big, but he can’t catch mice. You have a big tree and are upset that you can’t use it. Why not plant it by a nothing- at-all village in a wide empty waste? You could do nothing, dilly-dallying by its side, or nap, ho-hum, beneath it. It won’t fall to any axe’s chop and nothing will harm it. Since it isn’t any use, what bad can happen to it?” Chapter Two: On Equalizing Things Master Dapple of the South Wall sat leaning on his armrest. He looked up and sighed, vacant, as though he’d lost his counterpart. Yancheng Ziyou 16 stood before him in attendance. “What’s this?” he said. “Can the body re- ally be turned into dried wood? Can the mind really be turned into dead ashes? The one leaning on the armrest now is not the one who leaned on it before!” Master Dapple said, “My, isn’t that a good question you’ve asked, Ziyou! Just now I lost myself. Do you know? You’ve heard the pipes of people, but not the pipes of earth. Or if you’ve heard the pipes of earth, you haven’t heard the pipes of Heaven.” “May I ask what you mean?” “The Big Lump belches breath and it’s called wind. If only it wouldn’t start! When it starts, the ten thousand holes begin to hiss. Don’t you hear the 15 Xin k can be translated as either “heart” or “mind,” though the latter is usually more appropriate for Zhuangzi. The description of Huizi’s mind as full of underbrush may be a reference to Mengzi’s metaphor of moral sprouts. See also xin under Important Terms . 16 This is evidently Kongzi’s disciple, Ziyou, who is described in Analects 17.4 (not in this volume) as using music to instruct people in the Way.

210 ■ zhuangzi shsh-shsh? In the mountain vales there are great trees a hundred spans around with knots like noses, like mouths, like ears, like sockets, like rings, like mor- tars, like ditches, like gullies. Gurgling, humming, hooting, whistling, shout- ing, shrieking, moaning, gnashing! The leaders sing ‘Eeeeeeh!’ The followers sing ‘Ooooooh!’ In a light breeze it’s a little chorus, but in a gusty wind it’s a huge orchestra. And when the violent winds are over, the ten thousand holes are empty. Haven’t you witnessed the brouhaha?” Ziyou said, “So the pipes of earth are those holes, and the pipes of peo- ple are bamboo flutes. May I ask about the pipes of Heaven?” Master Dapple said, “Blowing the ten thousand differences, making each be itself and all choose themselves—who provokes it? Does Heaven turn? Does earth stay still? Do the sun and moon vie for position? Who is in charge here? Who pulls the strings? Who sits with nothing to do, gives it a push and sets it in motion? Do you think it’s locked in motion and can’t be stopped? Or do you think it’s spinning out of control and can’t slow it- self down? Do the clouds make the rain? Or does the rain make the clouds? Who rumbles all this out? Who sits there with nothing to do and takes per- verse delight in egging it on? The wind rises in the north—now west, now east, now dilly-dallying up above. Who huffs and puffs it? Who sits with nothing to do and blows it? May I ask the cause?” 17 Big knowledge is unbounded, Little knowledge is unbound. Big talk is unstoppable, Little talk doesn’t stop. In sound sleep, spirits mingle, On waking, bodies open out. They greet and grapple, And use their minds all day to struggle. The humble ones, the high ones, the hidden ones: the little fears panic, the big fears calm. They fly like an arrow from a bow— that’s the way they guard their rights and wrongs. 17 I follow Graham in importing the final lines of this passage, from “Does Heaven turn?” to the end, from a later chapter.

Zhuangzi ■ 211

They stick like they’d sworn an oath— that’s the way they hold to victory. They die like fall and winter— that describes their daily deterioration. They drown— and what makes it happen can’t bring them back. They’re sated as though sealed— that describes their stagnation. As the mind nears death, nothing can bring it back to vitality. Happiness, anger, despair, joy, planning, sighing, bending, freezing, elegance, ease, candor, posturing— It’s music out of emptiness! Mist condensing into mushrooms! Day and night they alternate in front of us without our knowing where they sprout from. Enough! Enough! Morning and evening we’ve got them, wherever they come from. Without them there would not be me, Without me there would be nothing to choose. This is close. But no one knows what makes it like this. It seems as though there is a true master, but you can’t get a glimpse of it. In our ac- tions we take the self on faith, but we can’t see its form. There is essence but no form. The hundred bones, the nine orifices, the six organs all exist together. Which do I think of as closest to me? Do you like them all? Or do you have a favorite? If so, are the rest its servants and concubines? Can’t servants and concubines rule among themselves? Can they take turns being lord and ser- vant? But if there is a true lord among them, whether I find its qing n , “essence,” or not makes no difference to its truth. Once you take a complete form, you don’t forget it until the end. Clash- ing with things and rubbing against them, the race is run at a gallop and

212 ■ zhuangzi nothing can stop it. Isn’t it sad? Your whole life slaving away and never see- ing the completion of your labors. Exhausted, you drudge and slave away without knowing where to turn for rest. Can you not mourn? People say they are not dead, but what difference does it make? Your form changes and your mind goes with it. Can you tell me that’s not mournful? Is everyone’s life re- ally this confused? Or am I the only one confused and not other people? If a made-up mind counts as a teacher, then who doesn’t have a teacher? Why should it just be the self-chosen experts on the order of things who have them? Stupid people would have them, too. But to have right and wrong before you’ve made up your mind—that’s like leaving for Yue today and getting there yesterday! That’s like saying what isn’t is. What isn’t is? Even the spiritual sage Yu couldn’t make sense of that. How could I? Saying is not just blowing. Saying says something. But if what it says is not fixed, then does it really say anything? Or does it say nothing? We think it is different from the peeping of fledglings. But is there really any differ- ence or isn’t there? How is the Way obscured that there are true and false? How are words obscured that there are shi b , “right,” and fei c , “wrong”? Where can you go that the Way does not exist? How can words exist and not be okay? The Way is obscured by small completions. Words are ob- scured by glory and show. So we have the rights and wrongs of the Confu- cians and the Mohists. Each calls right what the other calls wrong and each calls wrong what the other calls right. But if you want to right their wrongs and wrong their rights, it’s better to throw them open to the light. There is nothing that cannot be looked at that way. There is nothing that cannot be looked at this way. But that is not the way I see things; Only as I know things myself do I know them. Hence it is said, “ Bi ê , ‘that,’ comes from shi b , ‘this,’ and this follows from that.” This is the doctrine of the parallel birth of “this” and “that.” Even so, born together they die together. Dying together they are born to- gether. If they are both okay, they are both not okay. If they are both not okay, they are both okay. If they are right in a way, they are wrong in a way. If they are wrong in a way, they are right in a way. For this reason the sage does not follow this route but illuminates things with Heaven’s light. 18 He 18 Translating the word for “Heaven” as “nature,” this line could be read, “lets them shine by their natural light.”