CHAPTER SIX 

Xunzi 

Introduction

 Before the unification of China by the Qin state in 221 B . C . E ., which brought to a close the classical period of Chinese philosophy, Confucian- ism had one last great exponent, Xunzi É ! , whose work represents the highest development of the school in the Warring States period. Whereas the views of Kongzi and Mengzi are preserved only in piecemeal sayings, Xunzi’s thought has come down to the present in the form of tightly con- structed essays that give sustained discussion of various topics and together constitute a remarkably coherent system of arguments. Although his writ- ing is not quite as colorful as that of Zhuangzi, his style is extremely ele- gant and forceful, occasionally bursting into poetry that movingly conveys his passion for the Confucian way of life. Much of Xunzi’s effort is devoted to ardently defending Confucianism against various challenges. For example, he vehemently condemns Mozi’s re- jection of ritual and music and argues vigorously that these cultural forms are absolutely necessary. He also attacks Laozi and Zhuangzi for advocating that people adopt the perspective of Heaven and abandon conventional values in favor of yielding to the natural flow of things. Xunzi instead stresses the dis- tinctive importance of the human point of view, and in stark contrast to their emphasis on wu-wei 23 , “non-action” or “non-striving action,” he claims that good things are achieved only through wei Ä , “deliberate effort.” Yet even as he repudiates rival philosophers, Xunzi also learns from them and in- corporates their insights. The influence of Zhuangzi on his thought is par- ticularly evident in his characterization of the heart as mirror-like and in his description of how it comes to know the Way, though the substance of Xunzi’s views differs considerably from that of Zhuangzi. For Xunzi, the threats to Confucianism come not only from outside the tradition, but also from within it, in the form of Mengzi’s doctrine that human nature is good. In Xunzi’s opinion, such a claim undermines the authority of ritual as a guide to behavior, destroys the necessity of learning, and simply flies in the face of the facts. Xunzi makes the opposite declara- tion that human nature is bad, but this should not be read as saying that people naturally delight in evil. Rather, his point is that people lack any inborn guide to right conduct, and that without the external restraint of ritual they will fall into wrongdoing and be reduced to a chaotic, impover- ished state strongly reminiscent of the “state of nature” depicted by Thomas Hobbes. Nevertheless, Xunzi shares Mengzi’s belief that everyone has the potential to achieve moral perfection. However, since we are not inclined to virtue by nature, the process of self-transformation will be slow and dif- ficult, and this idea is reflected in Xunzi’s repeated comparison of learning with the harsh processes involved in bending wood. In his own day, Xunzi was a well-known scholar and was even given high office at one point. Among his students were Han Feizi and Li Si, who was instrumental in bringing about the Qin state’s domination of China. Xunzi may even have lived to witness this event. Other students of his were re- sponsible for preserving classic Chinese texts, including the Odes . Despite Xunzi’s important position in early Chinese intellectual history, when Mengzi’s views later came to be favored, Xunzi was rejected for claiming that human nature is bad, and his works were largely neglected for cen- turies. Recently, however, there has been a renewal of scholarly interest in Xunzi, and he is once again receiving the attention he deserves. Chapter One: An Exhortation to Learning The gentleman says: Learning must never stop. Blue dye is gotten from the indigo plant, and yet it is bluer than the plant. Ice comes from water, and yet it is colder than water. Through steaming and bending, you can make wood straight as a plumb line into a wheel. And after its curve conforms to the compass, even when parched under the sun it will not become straight again, because the steaming and bending have made it a certain way. Like- wise, when wood comes under the ink-line, it becomes straight, and when metal is brought to the whetstone, it becomes sharp. 1 The gentleman learns broadly and examines himself thrice daily, 2 and then his knowledge is clear and his conduct is without fault. 1 Cf. Gaozi’s metaphors for self cultivation in Mengzi 6A1–2, and Xunzi, ch. 23, p. 284. 2 Cf. Analects 1.4 (not in this volume).

XUNzi ■ 249 And so if you do not climb a high mountain, you will not know the height of Heaven. If you do not approach a deep ravine, you will not know the depth of the earth. If you do not hear the words passed down from the former kings, you will not know the magnificence of learning. The children of the Han, Yue, Yi, and Mo 3 peoples all cry with the same sound at birth, but when grown they have different customs, because teaching makes them be this way. . . . I once spent the whole day pondering, but it wasn’t as good as a moment’s worth of learning. 4 I once stood on my toes to look far away, but it wasn’t as good as the broad view from a high place. If you climb to a high place and wave, you have not lengthened your arms, but you can be seen from farther away. If you shout from upwind, you have not made your voice stronger, but you can be heard more clearly. One who makes use of a chariot and horses has not thereby improved his feet, but he can now go a thousand li . One who makes use of a boat and oars has not thereby become able to swim, but he can now cross rivers and streams. The gentleman is not different from others by birth. Rather, he is good at making use of things. . . . If you accumulate enough earth to form a mountain, then wind and rain will arise from it. If you accumulate enough water to form a deep pool, then dragons will come to live in it. If you accumulate enough goodness to achieve Virtue, then you will naturally attain to spiritlike powers and en- lightenment, and the heart of a sage is complete therein. And so, If you do not accumulate little steps, You will have no way to go a thousand li . If you do not accumulate small streams, You will no way to form river or sea. 5 Even the famous horse Qi Ji 6 could not go more than ten paces in a sin- gle leap, but with ten days of riding even an old nag can equal him, because accomplishment rests in not giving up. 7 If you start carving and give up, 3 These are the names of “barbarian” states and tribes. 4 Cf. Analects 15.31. 5 In the present translation, passages which rhymed in the original have been translated with rhyming English (though not always exactly according to the Chinese rhyme scheme), or, where this has not been feasible, they have been pointed out in the footnotes. 6 The horse Qi Ji was famous for his ability to go a thousand li in a single day. 7 This line was also rhymed in the original.

250 ■ Xunzi you won’t even be able to break rotten wood, but if you start carving and don’t give up, then you can engrave even metal and stone. The earthworm does not have sharp teeth and claws, nor does it have strong bones and muscles. Yet, above, it eats of the earth, and below, it drinks from the Yel- low Springs, 8 because it acts with single-mindedness. In contrast, the crab has six legs and two pincers. Yet were it not for the abandoned holes of water-snakes and eels, it would have no place to lodge, because it is fre- netic-minded. For this reason, Without Somber intention, No brilliant understanding can there be. Without determined effort, No glorious achievements will one see. . . . Where does learning begin? Where does learning end? I say: Its order be- gins with reciting the classics, and ends with studying ritual. Its purpose be- gins with becoming a noble man, and ends with becoming a sage. If you truly accumulate effort for a long time, then you will advance. Learning proceeds until death and only then does it stop. And so the order of learn- ing has a stopping point, but its purpose cannot be given up for even a mo- ment. To pursue it is to be human, to give it up is to be a beast. The History is the record of government affairs. The Odes is the repository of temperate sounds. Rituals are the great divisions in the proper model for things; they are the outlines of the proper classes of things. And so learning comes to ritual and then stops, for this is called the ultimate point in pursuit of the Way and Virtue. In the reverence and refinement of ritual, the balance and harmony of music, the broad content of the Odes and History , the subtleties of the Spring and Autumn Annals , all things between Heaven and Earth are complete. The learning of the gentleman enters through his ears, fastens to his heart, spreads through his four limbs, and manifests itself in his actions. His slightest word, his most subtle movement, all can serve as a model for others. The learning of the petty person enters through his ears and passes out his mouth. From mouth to ears is only four inches—how could it be enough to improve a whole body much larger than that? Students in an- 8 The Yellow Springs were believed to be deep underground and were thought of as the abode of the spirits of the dead.

XUNzi ■ 251 cient times learned for their own sake, but the students of today learn for the sake of impressing others. 9 Thus the learning of the gentleman is used to improve his own person, while the learning of the petty man is used like gift-oxen. 10 To speak without being asked is what people call being pre- sumptuous, and to speak two things when asked only one is what people call being wordy. Being presumptuous is wrong, and being wordy is wrong. The gentleman is simply like an echo. In learning, nothing is more expedient than to draw near to the right person. Rituals and music provide proper models but give no precepts. The Odes and History contain ancient 