CHAPTER SEVEN 

Han Feizi 

Introduction 

The last major thinker of the pre-Qin period is the social and political the- orist Han Feizi °c! (c. 280–233 B . C . E .). Han Fei was a member of the ruling house of the state of Han ° ; a small but influential state, strategi- cally located in the southern portion of China’s central plain. The book that bears his name is a collection of essays on the arts of government and rhet- oric, criticisms of historical episodes and existing philosophical doctrines, commentaries on earlier philosophical works, and collections of historical and semihistorical anecdotes to be used in the persuasion of rulers. Most of these works (including all the selections translated here) were written by Han Fei himself, but some of them appear to be the work of later authors and were probably added to the text by compilers during the Western Han dynasty. According to the historian Sima Qian, Han Fei was “a stutterer who could not speak his own counsel, but who was skilled at composing writ- ten works,” 1 and this may partly explain why, up until the end of his life, there is no record of Han Fei ever holding an important position in the government of his home state. Sima Qian also states that at some point early in his career Han Fei studied under the great Confucian philosopher Xunzi, and was a schoolmate of the infamous statesman Li Si Pô —who went on to become prime minister of the state of Qin—and was largely re- sponsible for Qin’s conquest of the Chinese cultural sphere in the year 221 B . C . E . Although Han Fei’s ideas seem to have fallen on deaf ears in the state of Han, his writings eventually brought him to the attention of the reign- 1 See William H. Nienhauser, Jr., ed. The Grand Scribe’s Records (Bloomington & Indi- anapolis, IN: Indiana University Press, 1994) v. 7, p. 25.

296 ■ han feizi ing king of Qin (i.e., the future first emperor of China), and as a result, Han Fei was dispatched as an emissary to the state of Qin in either 234 or 233 B . C . E . Unfortunately, Han Fei’s former schoolmate Li Si believed that Han Fei posed a threat to his own power, and so he, together with his com- patriot Yao Jia öõ , slandered Han Fei before the king of Qin, and con- vinced the king to have him imprisoned. While Han Fei was in prison, Li Si sent someone to offer him poison, and Han Fei, facing the prospect of a cruel execution and unable to defend himself before the king of Qin, ac- cepted the poison and took his own life. During Han Fei’s lifetime, the state of Han was plagued by internal dis- order and was in constant danger of being swallowed up by the ever-ex- panding state of Qin to the west. The fact that Han Fei was operating under these precarious conditions may help to explain why he came to ad- vocate such a pragmatic and largely amoral view of politics. Han Fei does not seem to have been the least bit interested in determining what form of government was most ethically justified. His goal was simply to determine which measures were most effective in ensuring the continued survival of the state and furthering the public interests of the ruler and his people. Han Fei rejected the Confucian and Mohist claim that a ruler should model his government on the values and institutions of the ancient sage- kings. He maintained that each stage in the development of human civi- lization comes with its own unique set of problems, and so the rulers of each age must be able to come up with new measures for dealing with these obstacles. A truly effective government must be based on an firm grasp of the existing sociopolitical conditions, and not on some ahistorical and overly idealized vision of human social life. Han Fei was also opposed to the traditional model of government because he believed it relied too heav- ily on the moral character of political agents. He did not deny that it was better to have a good ruler in power than a bad one, but he did not believe that moral goodness by itself was sufficient to guarantee peace and pros- perity. Furthermore, Han Fei recognized that while there may be some rulers who are either exceptionally good or exceptionally bad, most fall somewhere in between. If a system of government is to be sustainable over time, it must be stable enough to withstand the occasional bad ruler, and self-supporting enough to be maintained by the numerous mediocre ones. Han Fei was also deeply concerned about the proliferation of what he re- garded as politically dangerous or socially useless groups of people. Among the groups singled out for criticism by Han Fei, the most noteworthy are: classical scholars (i.e., Confucians), wandering orators, private swordsmen,

han feizi ■ 297 draft dodgers, and merchants. In his view, these five groups were nothing more than “vermin” who fed off the resources of the state without con- tributing anything substantial in return. If these groups were not wiped out or suppressed, Han Fei argued, they would eventually weaken the political structure of society and bring about the downfall of the state. Han Fei’s own political philosophy represents the culmination of a long movement toward institutionalism in early Chinese political theory. Some aspects of this institutionalist view can be seen in Xunzi’s emphasis on the political significance of li “public ritual” and socially defined standards of yi “rightness,” but the true proponents of this model of government were the so-called Legalist statesman like Guan Zhong, Gongsun Yang, Shen Buhai, and Shen Dao. 2 Han Fei’s role within the Legalist tradition is that of both synthesizer and critic. His major achievement was to show how the individual doctrines developed by the earlier Legalists could be combined into a single theory of government, while at the same time correcting and refining many of the central ideas contained in each of them. In addition to being a brilliant political theorist, Han Fei was also a great rhetoritician, and the style of his writings has often been praised by later writers. Han Fei not only invented a new genre of writing ( nan ú , “philo- sophical critique”) he also developed a new style of writing that later be- came known as the lian zhu ùû , “linked pearl,” style. But perhaps Han Fei’s greatest contribution in the field of rhetoric lies in his observation that an effective persuasion depends as much on one’s knowledge of the person being persuaded as it does on the quality of one’s argument, or the style of one’s presentation. This observation had important ramifications within the political culture of Warring States China. For the minister, it meant that if you wanted your proposal to be approved, you had to determine what sort of desires and aversions might be “in the mind” of the ruler you were persuading, so that you could adjust the way you presented your ideas to match what the ruler was already thinking. For the ruler, it meant that if you wanted to know the truth behind your ministers’ proposals and avoid being misled by their rhetoric, you had to work hard to conceal your own desires and aversions, so that your ministers could not change their words simply to please you. Han Fei’s philosophy had a tremendous influence on later political the- ory and practice in China. There is no way to determine what role his ideas may have played in shaping the government of the Qin dynasty, but we do 2 See Fajia under Important Terms and individual entries under Important Figures .

298 ■ han feizi know that his theories were often debated and discussed in the succeeding Han dynasty, especially during the height of the so-called Huang-Lao movement. After the Han it is difficult to find any thinker who refers to themselves as a Legalist, but by that point, many of the basic tenets of Le- galism had already been incorporated into the ideology of imperial Confu- cianism, where they continued to be used right down into the modern era. Chapter Five: The Way of the Ruler 3 The Way is the beginning of the ten thousand things and the guiding thread of truth and falsity. For this reason, an enlightened ruler holds to the beginning so that he may know the source of the ten thousand things, and regulates the guiding thread so that he may understand the starting points of excellence and failure. Thus, empty and still he waits, allowing names to define themselves and affairs to determine themselves. Being empty, he grasps the essence of phenomena; being still, he understands the correct- ness of movements. When a proposal is made, it itself serves to name the objectives. When an affair is carried out, it itself serves to form the results. When form and name are matched and found to be identical, there is noth- ing for the ruler to do, and everything returns to what is essential. Thus it is said, “A ruler should never reveal what he desires. For if he reveals what he desires, the ministers will cut and polish themselves accordingly. A ruler should never reveal what he intends. For if he reveals what he intends, the ministers will try to make themselves look distinctive.” Thus it is also said, “Get rid of likes and dislikes and the true character of your ministers will be plain. Dispense with experience and wisdom and your ministers will be forced to take precautions.” Thus, an enlightened ruler has wisdom, but he does not use it to make plans. He allows the ten thousand things to know their place. He has wor- thiness, but he does not use it to conduct his own affairs. He observes what his ministers and subordinates base their actions on. He has courage, but he does not use it to express anger. He allows the assembled ministers to fully extend their martial feelings. Thus, by getting rid of wisdom he achieves clarity; by getting rid of worthiness he enjoys achievement; by get- ting rid of courage he possesses strength. When the assembled ministers keep to their duties, the hundred offices follow a uniform standard, and the 3 This chapter is noteworthy for its appropriation of Daoist vocabulary. Han Feizi is in fact the author of the first extant commentary on the Laozi .

han feizi ■ 299 ruler employs them based on their abilities, this is called “exercising the constant.” Thus it is said, “Tranquil, he has no position to occupy. Isolated, no one knows his place.” When an enlightened ruler practices nonaction above, the assembled ministers will be anxious and fearful below. This is the way of an enlightened ruler: he makes it so that the wise fully exert themselves in making plans, while he uses their wisdom to manage his affairs. Thus, he is never lacking in wisdom. He makes it so that the wor- thy refine their natural talents, while he makes use of those talents and em- ploys them. Thus, he is never lacking in ability. He makes it so that when there are achievements he gets the credit for their worthiness, and when there are errors the ministers take the blame. Thus, he is never lacking in reputation. Thus, though he himself is not worthy, he is taught by those who are worthy; though he himself is not wise, he is corrected by those who are wise. The ministers perform the work, and the ruler enjoys the final achievement. This is what is called the guiding principle of a worthy ruler. The Way lies in not being seen, its use lies in not being known. Remain empty, still, and without concern, so that you may secretly observe the de- fects of others. See others but do not allow yourself to be seen; hear others but do not allow yourself to be heard; know others but do not allow your- self to be known. Once you understand someone’s words, do not alter or change them, but check them using the comparison of form and name. If you put one person in every office, and do not allow them to speak with one another, then the ten thousand things will all be completed. Cover your tracks, conceal your starting points, and your subordinates will not be able to see where you are coming from. Get rid of wisdom, dispense with ability, and your subordinates will not be able to guess your intentions. Hold on to what people have said before, and look to see if they match it with results. Carefully take hold of the handles of punishment and reward and maintain firm control of them. Cut off all hope of using them, smash all intentions to take them, and do not allow people to covet them. If you do not watch your door and strengthen your gate, tigers will live in your state; if you do not take care with your affairs and conceal your true character, thieves will be born in your country. Some people kill their rulers and take their places, making it so that no one dares not to join them. Hence, they are called tigers. Some people sit by their ruler’s side and lis- ten to his secrets for the sake of corrupt ministers. Hence, they are called thieves. If you break up their factions, arrest their benefactors, close their gates, and take away their support, the state will have no tigers. If your greatness cannot be measured and your depth cannot be gauged, if you

300 ■ han feizi match up form and name and examine laws and models, making sure that those who usurp powers that do not belong to them are executed, the state will have no thieves. Thus a ruler of men can be blocked in five ways: when a minister shuts off his ruler from others, this is the first kind of block. When a minister con- trols the wealth and benefits of the state, this is the second kind of block. When a minister usurps the power to issue commands, this is the third kind of block. When a minister is able to carry out righteousness, this is the fourth kind of block. When a minister can plant his own men in positions of power, this is the fifth kind of block. When a minister shuts off his ruler from oth- ers, the ruler loses his position. When a minister controls the wealth and ben- efits of the state, the ruler loses the power to grant favors. When a minister usurps the power to issue orders, the ruler loses control. When a minister is able to carry out righteousness, the ruler loses his clarity. When a minister can plant his own men in positions of power, the ruler loses his supporters. These are all things that only a ruler of men should control. They are not things that his ministers should be able to manipulate. The Way of a ruler of men takes stillness and retreat as its treasures. A good ruler does not personally manage his affairs, but he knows the differ- ence between clumsiness and skill. He does not personally calculate or make plans, but he knows the difference between good fortune and bad. Thus, even though he himself does not propose anything, he is good at re- sponding to the proposals of others; even though he himself does not per- form any tasks, he is good at increasing his own resources. When a ruler has responded to a minister’s proposal by assigning him a task, it is as if he holds the creditor’s portion of the qi tally. 4 When the task has generated some increase, it is as if he wields the commanders portion of the fu tally. 5 4 The qi ü tally served as a kind of contract or promissory note in Warring States China. When two parties entered into an agreement where one party agreed to provide the re- sources necessary to fund some item of business in exchange for a portion of the proceeds which that business would generate, the details of the transaction were written or carved on a bamboo or wooden slip, and the slip was then split in half. One half of the slip would go to the person who had provided the funds (i.e., the creditor), and one half would go to the person who would conduct the business (i.e., the debtor). In this passage, Han Fei is using the image of the qi tally metaphorically to describe the “debt” that a minister incurs when he proposes to perform some task in the service of his lord. 5 The fu á tally was a symbol of legitimacy used to show that an individual had been authorized by his superior to perform some task or speak on the superior’s behalf. These tal- lies were made from a wide variety of materials, including silk, jade, wood, and metal. When a subordinate was sent out on a military or diplomatic mission, he would be given the left-

han feizi ■ 301 It is from the matching of the qi and fu tallies that rewards and penalties are born. Thus, when the assembled ministers lay out their proposals, the ruler assigns them tasks based on their proposals, and then uses the tasks to hold them accountable for their achievements. If the achievements accord with the task and the task accords with the proposal, then the minister is rewarded. If the achievements do not accord with the task or the task does not accord with the proposal, then the minister is punished. The Way of an enlightened ruler is to make it so that no minister may make a proposal and then fail to match it with actions and results. For this reason, when an enlightened ruler hands out rewards it is gen- erous, like the fall of timely rain, and the hundred surnames all benefit from his bounty. When he hands out penalties, it is terrifying, like thunder and lightning, and even spirits and sages cannot undo his work. Thus, an enlightened ruler does not skimp on rewards or forgive penalties. If he skimped on rewards the successful ministers would become lazy in their work, and if he forgave penalties the corrupt minister would find it easy to do wrong. For this reason, those who make genuine achievements must al- ways be rewarded, even if they are distant and lowly, while those who make genuine errors must always be punished, even if they are close and cher- ished. If those who are distant and lowly are always rewarded for their achievements, and those who are close and cherished are always punished for their crimes, then those who are distant and lowly will not become re- sentful, and those who are close and cherished will not become haughty. hand portion of the tally as way of proving that he had the authority to act in his superior’s name. The superior would keep the right-hand portion of the tally, and use it as a means of proving to his operatives that the orders he sent via messengers were in fact from him and not from some outside party. In this line, Han Fei seems to be using the image of the fu tally to argue that a ruler should check to see that his ministers have only done those things that he has “authorized” them to do, based on their original proposal.

302 ■ han feizi

Chapter Six: On the Importance of Having Standards (A Memorial) No state is forever strong, no state is forever weak. If those who uphold the law are strong the state will be strong. If they are weak the state will be weak. . . . Thus, under King Zhuang of Chu and Duke Huan of Qi, the states of Chu and Qi enjoyed hegemony, 6 while under King Zhaoxiang of Yan and King Anxi of Wei, the states of Yan and Wei became strong. 7 Now, how- ever, these states have all deteriorated because their assembled ministers and government officials pursue that which brings about disorder instead of that which brings about order. Since these states are already weak and dis- orderly, if their ministers and officials abandon the laws of the state and make private arrangements with foreign powers, this will be like carrying wood to put out a fire—the weakness and disorder will only grow worse. Thus, at the present time, if a ruler can get rid of private crookedness and promote the public law, his people will become secure and his state will become well ordered. If he can expel private conduct and enforce the pub- lic law, his troops will grow strong while his enemies grow weak. Therefore, if when examining gains and losses there is a system of laws and standards that can be applied to the claims and actions of the assembled ministers, the ruler will not be decieved by trickery and falsehood. If when examin- ing gains and losses there is a scale of weights and balances that can be used to measure the importance of distant affairs, the ruler will not be deceived by the heaviness or lightness of the parties of the world. Now if you rely on reputation to advance the capable, the ministers will separate themselves from those above and spend their time colluding with those below. If you rely on political factions to promote men to office, the people will work to develop instrumental relationships and will not seek to be useful with regard to the law. Thus, a ruler who mistakes reputation for ability when assigning offices will see his state fall into disorder. If a ruler distributes rewards based on reputation, and hands out penal- ties based on slander, those people who covet rewards and hate penalities 6 Duke Huan of Qi (r. 685–643) and King Zhuang of Chu (r. 613–591) were the first and fourth of China’s “five lord protectors.” See ba “lord protector” under Important Terms . 7 King Zhaoxiang of Yan (r. 311–279 B . C . E .) and King Anxi of Wei (r. 276–243 B . C . E .) were the rulers of the states of Yan and Wei during periods when these states became minor military powers.

han feizi ■ 303 will abandon the public law and carry out their private schemes, colluding with one another in order to advance their mutual interests. If ministers forget their ruler and establish relationships with foreign powers in order to advance the interests of their confederates, there will be scant reason for subordinates to obey their superiors. When relationships are profuse and confederates are numerous, so that cliques and factions flourish both inside and outside the state, then even if a minister commits a great transgression, he will have ample means to cover it up. Thus